MSC4122: Simple Server Authorization (#4124)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/4124-server-auth-simple.md

This is a compromising MSC based on [MSC4099](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4099)
that tries to use concepts even more inline current authorization events,
and without changing the `/make_join` handshake.
This MSC was also created in reaction to [MSC2870](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2870),
that describes itself as stop gap to cover what the MSC has described
short comings of `m.room.server_acl`. We also agree that MSC2870 is
a stop gap and that the `m.room.server_acl` has severe shortcomings,
but we take the view that after 4 years of proposed stop-gaping,
there is enough time to introduce a more complete solution.

Related issues:
- https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/928

## Proposal

### The subscription authorization rule

This rule is be inserted after rule 3 in version 11, the check
for `m.room.create`'s content field `m.federate`.

1. If the type is `m.server.subscription`:
   1. If the `state_key` does not contain the server name for the
      origin server, reject.
   2. If the origin server's current participation is `permitted`, allow.
   2. If the `m.server.subscription_rule` is `deny`, reject.

>    3. If the origin server's current participation is `deny`, reject.

Author: This rule that consider the `current participation` seem weak, maybe impossible? I'm asking for some help here:

The authorization rules for `membership` use similar woreding `current membership`, and it's also not clear to me whether this current membership needs to be referred to by the considered event as an authorization event for it to be considered "current". 

The reality is that it does, especially around the rule for invite, "current membership" does seem to mean that the considered event needs to reference this membership event as an authorization event.

If this is true, then this rule will not work.

Author: I'm going to rewrite the rules not to appeal to the phrasing `current membership` because this does not seem right at all.

Author: This was clarified in the spec room https://matrix.to/#/%23matrix-spec%3Amatrix.org/%24RUKP8nFl7uHyL6MTk9DejDEveoviTrsRm4ko00uyomc?via=matrix.org&via=envs.net&via=element.io

  cannot send any other event without a corresponding
  participation of `permitted`.

`rule` is protected from redaction.

The `passive` state allows for rooms to operate as they do today,
new servers can freely join a room and start sending events without
prior approval from the administrators

The `active` state allows for a much safer way to run public Matrix rooms,
new servers can join a room, send the `m.server.knock` event
but cannot do more until a room administrator permits the new joiner with
an `m.server.participation` event. We expect that in practice automated
tooling will perform a simple reputation check and immediately permit
a new server to participate. This is an essential part of the proposal
as the `active` mechanism eliminates a current shortfall that
`m.room.server_acl` is a purely reactive tool in a join wave attack.

### The `m.server.knock` event, `state_key: ${origin_server_name}`

This event has no fields, because it can only be sent once, and
therefore cannot be edited if the wrong or malicious information
is provided.

The intent of the event is to only let the room administrators
explicitly aware of the server's existence.

> ### The `make_server_knock` handshake

Author: If someone can find a way to avoid the handshake, that would be great.

The only reason why it is included is because we use the signing of the `m.server.knock` template to verify the origin of the event. And it stops other servers creating `m.server.knock` events for servers that do not exist or servers that are not wanting to send a knock event to the room.

# MSC4124: Simple server authorization

This MSC proposes simple authorization rules that consider the origin

> server of a given event, with the aim of replacing `m.room.server_acl`.

Reviewer: This could do with a paragraph or two before this one which describes how server ACLs work today, and why they're insufficient. 

For example:
> [Server ACLs] in Matrix operate as a network firewall described by the room, requiring participation from all joined servers to be fully enforced. As they are not applied to the room model though, leaks can occur where a server not enforcing the ACLs (typically due to simply not implementing them) "pulls" events from banned servers into the room via `prev_events`. When an event referencing the banner server's events is sent over federation, the remote servers in turn fetch the banned events and present them to users.
> 
> Workarounds currently include banning/kicking all users from a banned server, and monitoring for leaks to potentially ban servers not enforcing the ACLs. These solutions require a room moderator to be highly knowledgeable on how ACLs actually work, which is rarely the case.

Author: I have now added a giant context section, but maybe this section should be moved to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/928? what do you think?

Author: I think that the section should be moved to the issue because it's independent to the proposal, but the proposal should be modified to keep referring back to it. But I want to hear from you before I do that.

Reviewer: Proposals should have enough context to be understood in isolation, as issues may be edited or mutated after the MSC is accepted. https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4126 is an example for incorporating issue context into the proposal.

Author: Ok, in that case I will add each point to the issue and make a shorter reference to them.

This is a compromising MSC based on [MSC4099](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4099)
that tries to use concepts even more inline current authorization events

> This MSC was also created in reaction to [MSC2870](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2870),
> that describes itself as stop gap to cover what the MSC has described
> short comings of `m.room.server_acl`. We also agree that MSC2870 is
> a stop gap and that the `m.room.server_acl` has severe shortcomings,
> but we take the view that after 4 years of proposed stop-gaping,
> there is enough time to introduce a more complete solution.

Reviewer: The language around MSC2870 here feels a bit strong. I'd suggest something along the lines of this:

```suggestion

[MSC2870](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2870)
describes a mechanism to help prevent rooms from breaking when a
room moderator redacts a server ACL event, and notes that such a
mechanism should be considered temporary until another MSC can replace
the server ACLs system with something more built into the room model.
This MSC is one variation on that future proposal.
```

Related issues:
- https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/928

> ## Proposal

Reviewer: Overall I think some sequence diagrams and example events would be helpful here. It's not clear to me what causes a server to try knocking (is it based on user action? which actions?), or how the various events really interact with each other.

Author: Yes, that's a really good idea, I'll try find the way other MSCs embed diagrams

Author: I've added diagrams for room creation and joining a room, is there any other scenarios you think will be helpful to show on a graph?

Reviewer: The diagrams look like a great start, thank you! Could we get some examples of what the flows look like when the knock rule isn't `passive`? 

Separately, some words on what Bob's user experience looks like would be good. This won't be a normative section, but helps ensure the proposal has considered user impact in its decisions.

### The `m.server.knock` authorization rule

> This rule is be inserted after rule 3 in version 11, the check

Reviewer: link to the spec please

for `m.room.create`'s content field `m.federate`.

1. If the type is `m.server.knock`:
   1. If the `state_key` does not contain the server name for the
      origin server, reject.

>    2. If there is existing state for the origin server's `m.server.knock`, reject.

Reviewer: What does "existing state" mean here?

   3. If the origin server's current participation is `permitted`, allow.
   4. If the `m.server.knock_rule` is `deny`, reject.
   5. If the origin server's current participation is `deny`, reject.
   6. Otherwise allow.

The purpose of this rule is to allow a server to send a knock
event, even if the `sender` has no membership event.

The purpose of rule 1.2 is to prevent denied servers from ever being
given the ability to craft any event whatsoever in a room that has always
had the `active` `m.server.knock_rule`.
This is because an `m.server.participation` event set to `deny` will
usually be topologically older than an `m.server.knock` due to the
`m.server.participation` usually referencing a recent
`m.room.power_levels` event. And so `m.server.knock` events could
be crafted by malicious servers without restriction without
rule 1.2.

### The `m.server.participation` authorization rule

> This rule is to be inserted before rule 4 in version 11,

Reviewer: link to the spec please

the check for `m.room.member`, and after the `m.server.knock` rule
described in this proposal.

1. If the origin server's current `participation` state is not `permitted`:
   1. If the `participation` state is `deny`, reject.
   2. If the `m.server.knock_rule` is `deny`, reject.
   3. If the `m.server.knock_rule` is anything other than `passive`, reject.

> ### The `m.server.participation` authorization event, `state_key: ${origin_server_name}`

Reviewer: Can users from the affected server send this event? ie: can `@alice:example.org` ban `example.org` (or permit it).

Author: In the way the proposal is currently written, if they have the power level to send `m.server.participation` then yes. I'm not sure whether that makes sense though, as the only time it needs to be allowed is when `m.server.knock_rule` is `active` around room creation, but maybe the room creation flow needs describing in the MSC.

Author: I probably need to add an equivalent of rule 4.3.1 https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v11/, `[Changed in this version] If the only previous event is an m.room.create and the state_key is the sender, allow.` for sending `m.server.participation` after `m.room.create`

> This is an authorization event that is used to authorize events

Reviewer: "authorization event" likely needs a link to the spec, describing what that means.

Author: is there anywhere in the specification the describes what it means?

I have linked to https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/server-server-api/#auth-events-selection for now.

Reviewer: That's probably the best place for now.

## Potential issues

### Racing with `m.server.knock_rule`?

We will embed `m.server.knock_rule` in `m.room.create` if it
someone raises concerns about a potential race condition or other issue
about this conflicting with `m.server.participation`. However, stating
that there might be without elaboration is not helpful, I'd need to
know how the race works. If there is insistence, then we will embed
within the `m.room.create` event.

### Soft failure of messages

Servers that had `participation` of `permitted` that are later
denied via `deny`, can have some of their messages soft failed
while the forks synchronise similar to https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/9329.

This could be addressed with [MSC4104](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4104).

### Mismatch with `m.room.power_levels`

There is an argument to be made that the ability to manage
`m.server.participation` should not be flat in the way that
`m.room.server_acl` is. Consider Alice being the room creator
and Bob being an admin. Bob could create an `m.server.participation`
event that denies Alice's server from participating, even if Alice

> is the same or a higher power level.

Author: It's unclear to me how to deal with this, considering there is no conception of server power or authority, unlike in previous proposals. It initially seems very complicated to map user power level back to servers, but thinking about it, it could be done.

You could take the power level event, and map each user to a server and work out what the server's highest ambient power level is.

> # MSC4124: Simple server authorization

Reviewer 2: I think we do need something like this (DAG aware server ACLs) in Matrix, in order to address the transitive delivery of abusive events ("leaky servers" in the proposal).

I think this MSC is trying to do too much though. Specifically, the "ambient room access" problem and associated explicit allow list adds a footgun (locking out good servers) and makes the federation more closed in general (the bootstrapping problem) to an otherwise good proposal.

history. This is because `m.room.server_acl` is intentionally
not specified with any consideration of DAG semantics. We believe
the intention of this is to stop a malicious server being able to add a
boundless number of soft failed events to the DAG. Which we believe
would be possible with current soft fail checks and a DAG based server
access system like the one within this proposal.

It should be clear that servers can leak events to conforming
implementations unintentionally, depending on whether the implementers
have implemented server access control in a conforming way.

### Problem: size limit

It is theorized by me completely from thin air that the server ACL
event can contain roughly `512` entries before a limit to the
event size is reached. A survey of #matrix-org-coc-bl:matrix.org
suggests that most ACL events contain `150`~ deny entries.
However, there have been unstable periods in Matrix's history
due to vulnerability of servers where the number of deny entries
has been much greater. For example, Synapse previously had weak
registration requirements by default that was exploited in a major
incident. There could be a need to protect rooms from vulnerable

> servers again in the future.

Author: @tulir said

> 64kb / 20 bytes per server = 3k
> or if someone attacked the system with max length domains (63 bytes + tld = 75 or so in total) the limit would be 873
